**Topic Introduction: Public transit and carbon emissions**

Substantial evidence shows that traffic has a noticeable effect on air pollution. Naturally, people have analyzed different ways we can limit carbon emissions via vehicles. Some have investigated electric vehicles, carpooling, and other variations of traffic reduction through tolls or taxes. Another popular method has been the demand for public transit. However, many cities especially in North America lack an effective transit system. These systems are extremely expensive, have a long production time, and can cause traffic problems in itself when being built.

**Question: How can we adjust or implement effective public transit systems to reduce carbon emissions? Is there a way we can determine if building a new system is environmentally worthwhile?**


Public transit is an effective means of reducing carbon emissions. In fact, according to a study by the US department of transportation, bus transit emits 33% less greenhouse gas emissions per passenger mile than the average car. However, when a bus is fully occupied, bus transit emits 82% less greenhouse gases than a private car [1].  Therefore, public transit has an essential role to play in our strategy to reduce carbon emissions. 

Because the ridership of a transit system significantly decreases the carbon emissions per passenger mile, it is essential that we maximize ridership. Bus service should be frequent, fast, reliable, welcoming to the rider in order to increase ridership. Strategies such as dedicated bus lanes, frequent and rapid bus service, improved bus shelters, and real time bus arrival information has helped Houston's METRO system increase ridership substantially. [2] By increasing ridership numbers, overall carbon emissions should decrease, since public transit reduces emissions per passenger journey compared to private cars. 

Another approach to reducing carbon emssions in transit system is using more efficient transit vehicles. For example, the UN Environmment program supports electric engines in buses in 16 countries and cities, estimates that they can reduce 6.6 MMT of carbon emissions by 2030.  [5] Because electric buses are powered by clean electric energy rather than diesel engines that release CO2 emissions, switching to electric buses can substantially reduce carbon emissions, especially when electricity is generated by sustainable means. 

The life cycle analysis is a standard method of evaluating environmental impacts of a system over its lifetime, and has likewise been applied to public transit systems to determine their environmental feasibility. For example, researchers in India used the standard LCA analysis to evaluate the differences between bus Ahmedabad bus rapid transit system and Delhi metro, discovering that a metro system generates more carbon dioxide emissions per passenger kilometer than a bus system, despite carrying more passengers. [3]

However, some LCAs often do not capture indirect impacts of constructing public transit systems. They do not address all dimensions of sustainability, namely economic and social impacts. Social impacts are often hard to quantify as well. In this case, we should use systems thinking strategies such as a CLD to discover indirect benefits, since transportation systems are complex. For example, reasearchers analyzed a light-rail transit system in turkey and found that the system has social benefits for the local community and workers in metrics such as health and safety, access to resources, contribution to economic development, and cultural heritage. [4] From these metrics, we could further estimate the reduced carbon emissions as a result of these social benefits, such as improved health. 




[1] https://www.transit.dot.gov/sites/fta.dot.gov/files/docs/PublicTransportationsRoleInRespondingToClimateChange2010.pdf
[2] https://www.researchgate.net/publication/343298629_Better_buses-Better_cities_How_to_plan_run_and_win_the_fight_for_effective_transit_by_Steven_Higashide_Washington_DC_Island_Press_2019
[3] https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cstp.2019.01.005
[4] https://doi.org/10.1002/ieam.4428
[5] https://www.unep.org/explore-topics/transport/what-we-do/electric-mobility/electric-buses