VIDEO ALERT: this lesson included 20 minutes of video.

Co-authors of **_The Practice of Adaptive Leadership_** (2009) and business leadership experts, Hiefetz, Grashow, and Linsky, suggest that adaptive leadership is an approach to making progress on the most important challenges you face in your world. The concepts, tools, and tactics of adaptive leadership aim to help you mobilize people toward some collective purpose, a purpose that exists beyond your own individual ambition. (p. 3).

Watch the 20-minute video below about adaptive leadership by Marty Linsky:

Here are some guiding questions for you to consider while watching the video (any of these questions could be on the final examination!).

1. What aspirations do you have for a group of people with whom you are connected? 
2.  What is the gap between this aspiration and the current situation?
3.  What can you do to close the gap between the current situation and your aspiration? 
4.  What is the difference between leadership and authority? 
5.  Why does Linsky say that leadership is risky and dangerous work? 
6.  What kind of situations require leadership? 
7.  What make adaptation difficult?

## Video - Adaptive Leadership, Leading Change
It's wonderful to be here the subject of this conversation is leadership,  but the unit of analysis is you. I spent the last quarter century or so thinking about leadership,  talking to people like you wondering why you and I don't exercise vision more often than we do. So in order to think about that today and share with you some thoughts,  I'd like to ask you to do a little favor for me. Think about some aspiration that you have for your family, for your community, for your organization, for your nation, for group of people, with whom you're connected. Some aspiration you have for some group of human beings, and think about the current reality; and I want you to think about that gap between your aspiration and the current reality. That gap represents a leadership opportunity and I'd like you to consider as we talk for the next 15 minutes or so,  what you can do to close that gap, what you can do to make progress in moving from the currentreality to get close closer to your aspiration. 


I'd like to begin by telling you a story. My interest here is trying to think about why people don't exercise leadership more often than they do why you don't, why I don't, and to try to use those insights as a way of helping us,  each of us, me very much included, exercise leadership more often than we do. 

The story is about Rudy Giuliani. Everybody remember Rudy Giuliani? How quickly they forget. Right well those of us from New York or who follow politics closely will remember that on September 10th 2001, Rudy Giuliani's reputation was in the pits. It was just awful. He had three and a half months left on his term as mayor before he was going to be term limited and had to leave office. He had announced his divorce to his wife on television: that's how she found out about. He had dropped out of the Senate campaign, his relationships with people of color in the city of New York were just terrible, it was awful. People could not wait to get rid of him, and then 2001 9/11, happened, and it was the perfect situation for Rudy Giuliani. He did what we want our mayors, our presidents, our people in authority, mom and dad to do when we're in trouble, and that is three things. He was present for us he was there at the scene. He felt our pain, and he calmed us down. And those functions, those functions of people in authority.  Providing direction and protection and order are the same for any person in authority. They are the same from mom and dad in a home, they're the same for a CEO of a company, they're the same for the president the United States. It's what we expect people in authority to do. It's very important work, the work of authority. Providing direction, protection, and order. But it has nothing to do with leadership. Nothing to do with leadership. It is a different kind of work - very important, no organization of human beings could survive or thrive without it. But it has nothing to do with leadership. 

Now roll the roll the story forward about six weeks or so, to say November 1st. On November 1st, Rudy Giuliani had accumulated more political capital than any politician in my lifetime. Rudy Giuliani could have been elected Pope on November 1st. And what did he do with that political capital? He did three things. He tried to extend his term limit, time as mayor. He squashed an investigation of looking into why New York wasn't better prepared, and he wrote a book, called, and I remember the name of his book - leadership. I just imagined, just imagine if Rudy Giuliani had taken that opportunity,  that enormous amount of political capital he had accumulated, and decided to help this country, and the whole world for that matter face up to a new reality that was represented by 9/11. Help us try to understand how the world was different than the world we were used to. Help us try to think about how we were going to change our behaviors, our way of looking at things, because the times were different. But what he said to us is what we wanted to hear. He said you go do your thing, do your jobs, go to restaurants, enjoy yourself, go to Disneyland, we'll take care of bad guys, we'll go get the bad guys for you. Which is exactly what we want mom and dad to do. Exactly what we want people in authority to do. 

Now this story represents to me the beginnings of an insight about why people don't exercise leadership more often than they do. Because leadership is a risky activity, and really Giuliani wanted to run for president. And if he had begun to engage us in that kind of a conversation, he would have put his prospects for running as president at risk. Turns out they were already at risk but he didn't know that yet. 

So I want to think about the difference between what we expect of people in authority and leadership. Let me use us as an example here. My assumption is that each of you has some expectation about what I'm supposed to do in the next 10 or 12 minutes that I have with you. And if I asked you to complete the sentence -  I expect Marty to, You'd be able to complete that sentence. Some people would say educate, stimulate, entertain, share some insights, tell some stories, they would be all around the same thing. But everybody would have some expectation, and so one way of thinking about my job is that I've got to figure out what you expect of me and to deliver it, and if I'm any good, todeliver it at a high level of competence. And if I can do that, if I can figure out what you expect of me and I can deliver it to you at a high level of competence, you'll be happy, you'll write good evaluations, Sally will be happy, TEDx will be happy, I'll get my expenses reimbursed, the world would work fine. Right, and I think that's the way organizational life works. I think it's way family life works. We figure out what is expected of us and we try to deliver it in a high level of competence, and we get rewarded for that, and we get rewarded whatever the coin of the realm is. The coin of the realm here is those things that Iwas talking about -  good evaluations, I get my expenses reimbursed, Sallie feels good about the event, TEDx feels good about the event, everybody is happy. One of the most pernicious ways that we reward people in organizational life for never exercising leadership is by calling them leaders. It's a way of keeping people right where we want them. Let's say this is a silly  hypothetical just to illustrate what I'm trying to suggest. Let's say I decided halfway through this conversation that what this group needed to learn about leadership was for me to go down - is it Greg? Chip? I used to be able to read that far but not a chance, not a chance anymore. And then I would go down to chip, take his glasses off and punch him in the face. That's what I thought this group needed to learn about leadership. What would happen in that moment? Now let's assume two things both

very problematic one at my age very

problematic that was a good punch let's

assume that and second I didn't pick the

one person in the room that everybody

wanted me to punch okay okay right I

wouldn't get reimbursed which is the

which is the metaphor I would get taken

out I wouldn't spend one other minute on

this platform now that's silly little

metaphor suggests to me one of the most

important reasons why you and I don't

exercise leadership more often than we

do because we understand that it is

risky and dangerous work we understand

that people who do exercise leadership

people who try to tell people what they

need to hear rather than what they want

to hear get themselves in trouble

leadership is dangerous activity and one

of the reasons we conflate we put

together leadership and authority is so

we don't get people pushing on those

boundaries upsetting us making us feel

uncomfortable

now the other idea that I want to think

about and surface here is what kinds of

problems require an exercise of

leadership because there are a lot of

problems for which the exercise of

authority is exactly what we want we

want people in authority to tell us what

to do and tell us what our role is and

to protect us from the outside world to

keep things calm but there are a set of

problems certain kinds of problems which

require a different kind of activity a

different kind of way of being in the

world you see I believe from my

experience and observation that

leadership has nothing to do with

position you can exercise leadership

from any position in any organization or

outside of organization I never use the

word leader because I think of

leadership as an activity as a behavior

as one person stepping into a situation

involving a bunch of other human beings

for some purpose and so what we're

talking about now is what are those

kinds of situations that require an

exercise of leadership require in order

to make progress

you're stepping out there you're taking

those risks and the kinds of problems to

me that require that are what I think of

as problems that require adaptation let

me give you my favorite current

illustration of an adaptive

this is a story about my mother my

mother is 97 years old

she lives alone in a high-rise apartment

building just outside of Boston she

doesn't do so well with a computer so my

guess is that she'll never be able to

hear me tell this story on YouTube but

but but she is she's really amazing

she's 97 years old she does crossword

puzzles she goes theater she plays

bridge two times a week it used to be

three times a week but one of the games

wasn't good enough for her so she quit

it she doesn't have a gray hair in her

head except a couple of years ago she

died what do you call high light she

died a high light in her hair a gray

high light so people would know that she

didn't dye her hair she she still drives

and she still drives at night and about

a year and a half ago her car began

accumulating more and more scrapes not

big humongous dents just little scrapes

noticeable scrapes now my mother is a

very very bright woman she knows

intellectually in her head the risks of

her driving and you talk to her about

her driving she'll say things like oh

it's not so bad I just keep my eye on

the white line but when you talk to her

for maybe five minutes three minutes 30

seconds what you immediately understand

is that for her stop driving would rip

part of her heart out

her identity is as a 97 year old woman

who still drives and drives at night and

she is the only person she knows in that

category it's as if it was all her name

was all one word

Ruth Linsky who drives at night write

one word and for her so she knows how to

stop driving and she knows how to fix

the dents in the car she doesn't

it's a classic kind of technical problem

it's beyond her competence like when you

break your arm I assume there are no

doctors in this room but there might be

you break your arm that's beyond your

competence technically it's a very

complex problem but every one of us in

this room knows how to access someone

for whom it's standard operating

procedure

same thing with dents in a car but

that's not where the problem lies in

adaptive work and adaptive problems they

live between here and here technical

work lives up here adaptive work lives

in people's hearts stomachs guts and

belief systems you know sometimes when

you're you're in a country that people

don't speak your language you think if

you talk slow where they will understand

or if you talk louder they will

understand the problem is not that they

don't understand the problem is that

they don't get the language and for you

to communicate with them you have to do

it differently than the way you normally

converse so for my mother to stop

driving would make a huge require a huge

adaptation now what makes adaptation

difficult if you think about plants and

animals and how they adapt what happens

when a plant or animal adapts

a species of dams is they lose part of

their DNA after all our DNA is 96% the

same as chimpanzees that 4% is really

really important but it's only 4% when a

plant or animal evolves part of their

DNA is left behind in order to make room

for something new leadership is

difficult because it is about the

distribution of loss when you are asking

people to adapt to a new reality you're

asking to them to give up something that

is important to them that's worked for

them that is part of who they are and

what makes them feel comfortable in life

what an organization has to change

you're asking people to give up some way

of being some product line some service

some function that was important to get

them where they are leading adaptive

change is difficult because it is about

the distribution of laws and the

opportunity that represents when you are

trying to lead change in your family in

your community in your organization and

your civic life and your religious life

wherever you're functioning with you

from human beings is to begin to

understand the resistance that you're

getting not as a function of people not

getting it but because people do get it

and they don't like it your brilliant

idea doesn't sound so brilliant to them

because it's threatens something that's

important to them the reason that I

wanted to talk about this is because we

spend too much time talking about the

inspirational parts of leadership and

not enough time

talking about the perspiration aparts

and i think that's one of the reasons

that we don't exercise leadership more

often than we do we are in an

extraordinary period of time we are all

living in an extraordinary period of

time a period of rapid change tremendous

uncertainty requiring us to make

decisions based on indicate inadequate

information and that's just as true and

your family as it is in your country and

it is a time in which the world needs

you to exercise leadership more often

than you do so whether you're a person

who takes advantage of five percent of

the opportunities or 50 percent of the

opportunities to exercise leadership

because I think the opportunities come

before each of us every day the

challenge is how you can get that five

percent up to seven percent how you can

get that 7 50 percent up to 52 percent

the world and the people who you live

with and play with

the function with need you to do that

thank you very very much

you

# 7.2.2 Personal Reflection
A take-away from the previous page in this lesson is that adaptive leadership starts by engaging in an iterative process made of three steps:

1.  Observing events and patterns around you;
2.  Interpreting what you are observing (i.e., developing multiple hypotheses about what is really going on);
3.  Designing interventions based on the observations and interpretations to address the adaptive challenge you have identified.

Steps 1 and 2 above are often referred to as _**personal**_ **_reflection_**.

Here are key elements of personal reflection:

### Key Elements of Reflection

Reflection is a type of thinking associated with deep thought, aimed at achieving better understanding from which meaningful action emerges. It contains a mixture of elements, including

### Making sense of experience

We don't always learn from experiences. Reflection is where we analyze experience, actively attempting to 'make sense' or find the meaning in it.

### 'Standing back'

It can be hard to reflect when we are caught up in an activity. 'Standing back' gives a better view or perspective on an experience, issue or action.

### Repetition

Reflection involves 'going over' something, often several times, in order to get a broad view and check nothing is missed.

### Deeper honesty

Reflection is associated with 'striving after truth'. Through reflection, we can acknowledge things that we find difficult to admit in the normal course of events.

### 'Weighing up'

Reflection involves being even-handed, or balanced in judgment. This means taking everything into account, not just the most obvious.

### Clarity

Reflection can bring greater clarity, like seeing events reflected in a mirror. This can help at any stage of planning, carrying out and reviewing activities.

### Understanding

Reflection is about learning and understanding on a deeper level. This includes gaining valuable insights that cannot be just 'taught'.

### Making judgments

Reflection involves an element of drawing conclusions in order to move on, change or develop an approach, strategy or activity.

If you are interested in learning more about adaptive leadership now, have a look at (i.e. skim) the Heifetz, Grashow, and Linsky book by searching the title on the internet and looking at the google book version. (If you want to read the entire book, you will need to buy a hard copy.)

### OPTIONAL

#### CHECK YOUR LEADERSHIP SKILLS!

Compare your attitudes and behaviours with those of adaptive leaders by taking the quiz at this website. Please note that, to obtain your quiz results (i.e., comments on your answers), you will need to provide your name and e-mail address.

Adaptive Leadership QUIZ: [http://cambridge-leadership.com/how-adaptable-are-you/Links to an external site.](http://cambridge-leadership.com/how-adaptable-are-you/)

# 7.2.3 Fundamental Attributes of Leadership
We now know that engineering has a crucial role to play in supporting society's move toward sustainability.  Unless engineers are willing to step up to initiating change, the profession will not fulfill its role as stewards of both the built environment and the bio-physical systems on which we depend.

[Erhard et al.Links to an external site.](https://poseidon01.ssrn.com/delivery.php?ID=610126066081064007097081029100123031027087059053021075022004065123068087002084091106062099021118024016045068089013071092123127016091088002016104006005117119015114065053077056100112092126102121068073025097068090116090073071073114005119031120118080021124&EXT=pdf) pick up on the theme of personal motivation introduced by Linsky in the video you watched on Tab 2.1 of this lesson.

They state that

> "Effective leadership does not come from mere knowledge about what successful leaders do, or by trying to emulate the characteristics or styles of noteworthy leaders, or from trying to remember and follow the steps, tips or techniques from books on coaching on leadership – and certainly not from merely being in a leadership position, or position of authority.”

Well then, if these are all the methods by which one does NOT develop leadership skills, how CAN you become a leader, i.e. how does one develop leadership skills? Erhard et al. successfully argue that leadership starts by building three foundational attributes:

1.  **Integrity:** integrity is achieved by “honouring your word”. It develops trust among people.
2.  **Authenticity:** authenticity involves acting in a way that is consist with who you hold yourself out to be for others as well as who you hold yourself to be for yourself.
3.  **Committing to something bigger than oneself** (sound familiar? If not, then listen to Linsky again!): committing to something is a personal choice. It’s ok to choose a path that doesn’t involve being committed to something bigger than oneself! To become a leader, making this personal choice is essential.

The remainder of this lesson in CIVL 250 focuses on what it means to "honour your word".  It may not mean what you think!

# 7.2.4 Integrity
In a 2009 article published by the Rotman School of Business at the University of Toronto, Professor Jensen explains the “business case” for acting with integrity. He writes:

> Without integrity, the workability of … [a] person, … declines; and as workability declines, the opportunity for performance declines.

He then states that

> one's word to one's self is a critical part to integrity.

Imagine, for example, a self-discipline situation where you say to yourself that you are going to do something (go to the gym, help a friend, refrain from gossip) only to forfeit the opportunity to maintain your integrity by subsequently dismissing your word (i.e., you DON'T go the guy, DON'T help a friend, or DON'T refrain from gossip).

If you are not committed to the self-discipline aspect of integrity, then “unworkability” is created in your life. And 'unworkability" likely results in a lack of leadership.

The "business leadership language" uses words and phrases like "_**unworkability**_", "_**honouring one's word**_" - these are not what engineers think of regarding integrity. We think of _**trust and honesty**_. But taking a slightly different perspective (i.e. that of business) allows us to examine integrity more thoroughly.

Here is how Professor Jensen (and others) describe the components of "honouring one's word":

1.  **Do what you said:** Whatever you have said you will do or will not do, and in the case of do, doing it on time.
2.  **Do what you know:** Whatever you know to do, or not to do, and in the case of do, doing it as you know it is meant to be done and doing it on time, unless you have explicitly said to the contrary.
3.  **Do what is expected:** Whatever you are expected to do or not do (even when not explicitly expressed), and in the case of do, doing it on time, unless you have explicitly said to the contrary.
4.  **What you say is so**: Whenever you have given your word to others as to the existence of something or the state of the world, your word includes being willing to be held accountable that the others would find your evidence for what you have asserted.
5.  **Do what you say you stand for:** What you say you stand for, whether expressed in the form of a declaration made to one or more people, or even to yourself, as well as what you hold yourself out to others as standing for (formally declared or not), is a part of your word.
6.  **The social moral standards, the group ethical standards, and the governmental legal standards of both right and wrong and good and bad behaviour** - of society, groups, and governmental state in which one enjoys the benefits of membership - are also part of one's word unless:

-   one has explicitly and publicly expressed the intention to not keep one or more of these standards, and
-   one is willing to bear the cost for refusing to conform to these standards.

# 7.2.5 Not keeping one's word
Notice that honouring one's word is different from keeping one's word. Sometime we cannot keep our word. Erhard et al. suggest that _**honouring one's word means**_:

-   Keeping your word (and on time). _And_, whenever you will not be keeping your word:

-   Just as soon as you become aware that you will not be keeping your word (including not keeping your word on time) saying to everyone impacted

-   that you will not be keeping your word, and
-   that you will keep that word in the future, and by when, or that you won’t be keeping that word at all, and
-   what you will do to deal with the impact on others of the failure to keep your word (or to keep it on time).

Hmm, this sounds like professional etiquette as described by EGBC doesn’t it.

### Business Example of Honouring One's Word

Some of you may have heard of a sad incident in 1982 when cyanide-laced Tylenol capsules resulted in the deaths of a number of citizens in the United States. The bottles containing the Tylenol capsules had been tampered with.

The executives of Johnson and Johnson could not keep their word that Tylenol capsules were safe (as stated on the containers). But they were able to honour their word (when they could not keep their word) by immediately recalling all Tylenol bottles and replacing the product with Tylenol contained in “safety-sealed” bottles.

# 7.2.6 Summary
Of course, the notion of personal integrity as something to vaIue and strive toward is not new! In the words of William Shakespeare’s Hamlet (Act I, Scene III):

> _"This above all: to thine own self be true,_
> 
> _And it must follow, as the night the day,_
> 
> _Thou cans’t not be false to any man.”_

To sum up:

-   People resist change because change often involves losing something important.  An adaptive leader, i.e. someone who is committed to something bigger than him or herself, needs to help people adjust to this loss.
-   Those who have studied leadership tell us that groups of people are willing to be influenced by trustworthy individuals who are acting, not in self-interest, but toward achieving something that is bigger than themselves.  
-   Successful leaders have integrity, keep their word, and are leading, not out of self-interest, but in order to achieve something that is important to the group they want to lead.