# 4.3.1 Introduction
As suggested by the 2019 world wide ranking system for universities, UBC is a leader in how to reduce GHG emissions and improve urban-scale biodiversity. This is important because, with a population of about 60,000, it operates at the same size as many Canadian municipalities.

Lesson 3 of Module 4 offers you insight into aspects of sustainable urban infrastructure found at UBC.

# 4.3.2 The ecosystem approach to resilient design
For several years, UBC planners, architects, landscape architects, engineers, and others, have worked toward applying the ecosystem approach to developing infrastructure policy, management, design, operation, and maintenance activities.

This 4.5 minute video reviews the application of complex system theory to urban infrastructure. When watching the video, it's important to be aware of interactions and interdependencies between infrastructure elements that exist at different scales.

**What is ecosystems approach**
The ecosystem approach to infrastructure design involves consideration of the context of the design (e.g. the bio-physical context, the political context, cultural context, economic context and so on), as well as both the short and long term impacts of the design, and the direct and indirect impacts of the design. It also necessitates awareness of the systems in which the infrastructure is embedded (including the ecological, geographic, climatic systems, and the different levels of social and economic systems). finally, the ecosystem approach necessitates the considerations of the entire life cycle of the infrastructure. These considerations influence the goals of the infrastructure design.

*Video*
WE must understand complex systems theories between human and natural when retrofitting buildings

This approach to urban development created by James Kay

Originated in biology and ecosystems science
- biophysical sciences
- social sciences
- complex systems theory
- understanding socioeconomic-politcal situations
- collaborative learning processes
- adaptive process of governance, management, and monitoring for sustainability.

A new persepective compared to traditional linear approach to decision making.

Local government and policy making -> Motions and bylaws/ decisions -> urban development

Now interrelated loop diagram

Helps us understand many interactions in cities
support management of individuals and city as a whole

ecosystem approach:
develop awareness of direct and indirect interactions between elements of cities
understanding elements exists at different scales

e.g. CIRS building
PV - small impact

Distinguish multiple subsystems that contribute to a larger system
Smaller systems are easier to analyze because less elements and interactions / mechanisms

Be aware of interactions of subsystems in large systems

We can analyze subsystem while considering broader context with ecosystems approach.
e.g. analyze impact of water system of building, while considering influence on building (e.g. wastewater and stormwater), which influence municipal version of system, which influences regional policy

Can be reversed too. Region can impact building through policy and other mechanisms.

Difference in physical scale of system elements / relationships also emphasizes system life cycles

Systems boundaries:
e.g. rising sea levels (e.g Bangladesh)
	Delta - Local, use dikes
	Regional / National (Emergency Response coord B.C)
		- relocate all vulnerable human settlements

Consider:
 - Materials, energy, and information flows within and between built and natural environments
 - Systems and system scales
 - Life cycles of infrastructure and its elements

Guiding questions for viewing the video:

-   What is the theoretical basis for the ecosystem approach to urban infrastructure design?
-   What is the ecosystem approach?
-   Describe an infrastructure example arising from the ecosystem approach.
-   Explain and example of how context influences infrastructure design.

The next Tab in this lesson introduces you to the thinking behind the infrastructure with which you interact as a student here at UBC.

# 4.3.3 The ecosystems approach at UBC
John Madden, the Director of Sustainability and Engineering for UBC's Vancouver campus operation, describes the ecosystem approach applied to UBC's infrastructure.

When listening to this 6 minute interview, be aware of the strategies for mitigating GHG emissions on campus and also addressing biodiversity loss. Also, put on your systems thinking hat by asking yourself:

-   How does John think about mass, energy, and information flows within and between infrastructure?
-   How does he view green space?
-   How are interdependencies between infrastructure systems (and between elements within these systems) acknowledged and leveraged to optimize operations?

**Video Notes**
We have to consider (aggresively) about the protection of the natural environment as a service to the city as we expand

Not mutually exclusive

Consider ecosystem services as we design our cities
e.g. stormwater integrated to city building rather than standalone
	allows us address freqeunt intense rain events
	enhance public ground (quality of space), contributor to natural park system
	natural corridors / green corridors act also as recreation
	Metabolism of our city contributing to overarching development of net positive condition

Cities are complex systems, interleaving,
	considering throughputs - food, energy, materials
	Major consumers of global resources
	Finding synergies between investments in city building at many scales
	Cities more resilient and adaptive to change (climate)

Biodiversity addressed at many scales
	At building scale:
	We can amplify these efforts\
	Green belt plan - enhance biodiversity through green routes / walls
	Enhancing planting palate - diverse palate
	Opportunity to protect tree assets in terms of passive gain
		e.g. mitigating against solar gain during summer
		enhance biodiversity
		attract butterflies and birds etc.
	Incremental repair (change from either or approach)
	

Ecological and human health
	Better connection -> better resilient communities
	better social cohesion
	Place for people to gather in green areas
	lowers anxiety

Recognizing these at these scales:
	allows us to improve approach to civic design at all scales:
		landscape architect
		civil engineer
		ecologist
		planner
	Think beyond specific discipline / expertise area to consider integrated planning
	Consider constraints and opportunities
	Sysnergies - awareness of other disciplines open opportnities