# 2.2.1 Introduction
Professional engineers (particularly those interested in pro-actively shifting human activity toward sustainability) need to be able to present ideas effectively.  Sometimes, this means being able to argue.

Argumentation can mean different things to different people. For some, argumentation means people shouting at each other! For others, it is the act of disagreeing, and for still others, it is the process of debating or otherwise exploring ideas and concepts.

The comedians from the 1970s, Monty Python's Flying Circus, have a famous spoof about argumentation:

**Monty Python Comedy Sketch**
https://www.dailymotion.com/video/x2hwqn9

## Defining Argumentation

The academics Kuhn and Franklin (2006, p. 979) describe argumentation as follows:

> _An individual constructs an argument to support a claim. The dialogic process in which two or more people engage in debate of opposing claims can be referred to as argumentation or argumentative discourse ….  implicit … is the advancement of a claim in a framework of evidence and counterclaims that is characteristic of argumentative discourse._

Source: (Kuhn, D., & Franklin, S. (2006). The second decade: What develops (and how)? In W. Damon & Richard M. Lerner (Series Eds.), D. Kuhn & R. Siegler (Vol. Eds.), Handbook of child psychology: Vol. 2, Cognition, perception, and language (6th ed., pp. 953–993). Hoboken, NJ.)

More simply, and for the purposes of CIVL 250, _**argumentation** occurs in some sort of a social environment (like an on-line discussion) in which arguments are presented. Critically, argumentation is a form of communication that aids in the consideration of issues and may lead to at least the tentative, perhaps temporary, resolution of an issue_.

# 2.2.2 Four components
An **argument** consists of a claim, which is supported by reasons that are backed by evidence. Thus an argument consists of four components: claim, reason, evidence, and warrant.

> -   **Claims** are statements about what is true or good or about what should be done or believed. Basically, they are arguable statements. Reasons are statements that support a given claim.
> -   **Reasons** provide justification for the claim and can be linked to the claim by the word because.
> -  **Evidence** substantiates the reasons and comes in different forms and typically varies from discipline to discipline (i.e., an historian and an engineer might employ different bodies of evidence to support the same reason).
> -   **Warrants** (sometimes called inferences) connect the reason to the claim. Warrants are often assumed and may be difficult to detect.

Here are two examples of an argument:

_**Example 1**_

**Claim:** Academics are hard to understand.

**Reason:** because they use language and refer to concepts that are not in common usage.

**Evidence:** Studies have shown that university students retain only 8 to 15% of the information presented in a university lecture, when they are tested immediately after listening to the lecture.

**Warrant:** Students would learn more in lectures if the language used by the professor was more common.

_**Example 2**_

**Claim:** Airplane travelling is a safe mode of transportation

**Reason:** because relatively few airplane passengers are injured

**Evidence:** Statistics show that the probability of injury while travelling by air is much smaller than the probability of injury while travelling by automobile.

**Warrant:** travelling by auto is reasonably safe.

_In CIVL 250, you are expected to learn and apply the basic structure of argumentation both in your small group discussions and in your responses to exam questions._ Please become familiar with the components of the argument. It is expected that you will apply this structure during your small group discussions, and in your examinations.

# 2.2.3 Media Critique
Understanding and creating arguments is a critical aspect of engineering practice because we need to analyze the recommendations of others and justify our own decisions and recommendations.  Yet the application of argument analysis is almost always a challenge.  In part, the challenge comes because it is rare that arguments are presented precisely in the form of the four components of argument introduced in the preceding page.

Argumentation can be used to analyze news articles.  As an engineer, it's important that you are aware of current events relevant to engineering practice and that you are able to analyze related arguments found in public discourse. 

To practice your skills of argumentation, identify the main claim, supporting reasons, evidence and warrants of the following article published on October 15, 2015 in the South China Morning Post:

-   [How Technological Advances Underpin Hope for Climate Change Adaptation (Links to an external site.)](http://www.scmp.com/comment/insight-opinion/article/1868356/how-technological-advances-underpin-hope-climate-change)

To find the answers to this question, proceed to the next page of this lesson.

_Note that an analysis question similar to the one above could be asked in the midterm or the final exam._

# 2.2.4 Response
In the previous Tab of this lesson, you were challenged to read a media article, then identify its **main claim**, the **reasons** and **evidence** supporting the main claim, and any **warrants** you might be able to identify.  

Here is a solution to this challenge.

**Primary Claim**:  _Technological transformation could enable standards of living in the industrialized world to be maintained, while also reducing carbon emissions enough so that developing countries can grow their economies and therefore their emissions up, to global per capita levels_.

There are a number of **reasons** provided in the article that support this claim:

1.  Most countries are motivated to deal with the impacts of increasingly severe natural hazards caused by both global and regional environmental changes resulting from climate change.
2.  In some developed countries, reliable and economic technology may provide sufficient capacity for non-fossil energy for electricity generation and transportation.
3.  An immediate action resulting in a reduced rate of GHG emissions in developed countries is to reduce the speed of road vehicles, shipping and aviation.
4.  As smart technology in buildings (i.e. computerized control systems of heating and other services) is introduced, total energy use can be substantially reduced.
5.  Advanced materials for insulation and structural use will result in lower energy use for buildings.

### Evidence supporting Reason 1

In his article, Lord Hunt does not directly support Reason 1 with evidence. However it might be argued that Lord Hunt's statement regarding reason 1 was really a summary of his introduction which describes the meeting in October 2015 (i.e. preceding the COP21 event) of "parliamentarians, industry leaders, and academics" from all over the world. The objective of this meeting was to explore a range of practical and also transformational strategies.  So evidence for reason 1 is in the success of the October meeting.

### Evidence supporting Reason 2

Reason 2 of Lord Hunt's argument is supported by the photo of and Indian solar panel project in Rajasthan.  Also, the editors of the South China Morning Post provide a link to an article that, presumably, provides some evidence that China, the US, and India have successfully cut their carbon emissions (or at least slowed the rate of growth of carbon emissions).

### Evidence supporting Reason 3

Reason 3 is not supported by evidence.  In this case, Lord Hunt is presenting this option as though it is common knowledge that slower speed results in better "mileage".

### Evidence supporting Reasons 4 and 5

There appears to be no evidence in the article that supports reasons 4 and 5.

Warrants include:

-   Unstated:  Increasing per capita GHG emissions within the world poor countries is a necessary outcome of increasing the standards of living within those countries.  
-   Unstated:  Motivation is sufficiently strong to excite investment and behaviour change required to execute the suggestions made by Lord Hunt.
-   Unstated:  Better vehicle mileage results in lower GHG emissions.
-   Unstated:  The actions described by the author will be sufficient to reduce the overall global surface temperature increase to less than 2 degrees Celsius (compared to the pre-industrial average) by the end of the century.

As you can see from this analysis, it can happen that a media article does not provide evidence for a reason!