**What are we doing today? The same thing we do everyday!**

Sustainability problems are often ambiguous and complex – as you’ve likely started to notice.

Transdisciplinary skills that encourage high-level problem solving can help us tackle sustainability problems more effectively. In some engineering courses, you’re trained to work towards a single ‘right’ answer …but this approach is often unrealistic in the real world.

**Cue** - a teaching as research project designed to teach a new learning approach and test its effects directly in the classroom! This research study is performed by Laura Sloboda and sponsored by the Center for the Integration of Research, Teaching and Learning at UBC.

In this module, we aim to provide you with a few cool tricks for structuring ambiguous problems.

We’re also excited to tell you all about a learning superpower that you already have… and how it can help you to ace this course! Not to mention become generally more awesome, even though you’re already pretty awesome.

**For your information**

Your participation in this study in entirely voluntary and your grade will not be affected by your choice to consent to being a part of this study. All identifying information will be removed from your responses and will not be shared with your instructor or TAs. The study results will not be made available to your instructor until after the course ends and all grades have been submitted.

**Let's get to the good stuff. Spoiler alert!**

We’re going to let the cat out of the bag right now… because you deserve to know about this superpower ASAP!!!

It’s something scientists like to call metacognition and it’s basically the ability to think about the way you learn. The best part? It's like a secret sauce for continuous self-improvement.

**Our plan of attack**

-   Reflect on your knowledge of metacognition by completing 2 multiple choice surveys
-   Learn how to create a structured argument by generating and prioritizing 5-6 concepts in a fishbone diagram using the PESTLE framework. Don't worry, we'll explain everything as we go!

[Begin here by completing the consent form!](https://canvas.ubc.ca/courses/97899/quizzes/493435 "MAI Pre-Test")

You may complete the lesson below regardless of whether or not you agreed to allow your responses to be used for research purposes. Enjoy and thanks for your participation!

[Take the study on metacognition!](https://canvas.ubc.ca/courses/97899/quizzes/493451 "Metacognition")

How was your experience?

[Let us know by completing the feedback survey!](https://canvas.ubc.ca/courses/97899/quizzes/493450)