# 7.3.1 Introduction
You have learned that leadership includes

-   Practicing integrity
-   Being authentic
-   Committing to something that is bigger than yourself

Perhaps these core attributes make the most sense when you ask yourself if you would want to follow anyone who _**does not**_ have these characteristics!

The authors of The Practice of Adaptive Leadership (recall Lesson 2 from this week) add to the list of leadership attributes by describing what successful leadership actions have in common:


## More adaptive Leadership
-   Successful adaptive changes build on the past rather than jettison it.
-   Organizational adaptation occurs through experimentation.
-   Adaptation relies on diversity.
-   Adaptation generates loss and is therefore difficult.
-   Adaptation takes time.

The following Tab in this lesson offers two examples of sustainability leaders.  With the above attributes of leadership in mind (and perhaps with others you have identified from your own experiences), listen carefully to each of these leaders. Which of the above attributes do these folks demonstrate?

# 7.3.2 Examples
### Bill McDonough

Dr. McDonough is an architect, former University president, writer, and more (he's really old now), who has inspired people to create great change. His book (written with Michael Braungart, a chemical engineer and former president of Greenpeace Europe), [Cradle-to-Cradle (Links to an external site.)](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cradle-to-cradle_design) has had a significant influence on moving the design community toward sustainability. Watch this video and look for leadership attributes ([http://vimeo.com/22055206 (Links to an external site.)](http://vimeo.com/22055206))

#### Guiding Question:  Which leadership attributes does Bill McConough demonstrate?

## Video Notes
Designer, dreamer, father, traveller, codeveloper with german chemist Michael Braungart of crade to cradle protocol for design, coauthor of similar book


1. We start with values, then to principles, goals, strategies, tactics, metrics
	1. most engineers / designers start with metrics ->  tactics -> strategies -> goals -> principles
	2. we should start with values instead
	3. e.g. (we would like to design for children) -> 
	4. Hannover Principles -> 
	5. Diverse, safe, healthy, just, power, water, soil, air, economic, equitably, ecologically, elegantly, enjoyably -> 
	6. footprint (look at positive footprint instead of negative footprints)
		1. e.g wetlands instead of wasteland
		2. instead of giant asphalt roof (urban heat island) ->
		3. create world largest green roof
		4. save money in water cleaning technology
		5.  = $900M worth of cars to come in
		6. birds like it, loves children
2. designing for world of abundance, not otherwise
3. we have a material problem, not energy problem - material in wrong place, in the atmosphere. 
	1. carbon accrues in soil, why put in air. 
	2. Wrong design
	3. Carbon is a blessed material as long as it is in the soil
4.  Work done applies on all scales
	1. say global and act local
	2. We should consider whole system -
		1. sun is our income - wireless and here in 8 minutes
		3. Mass / Earth is minerals and water (Inorganic Chem)
		4. Apply sun and water - magic things happen
		5. Then we have biology - something that grows - good growth (e.g. tree), minerals and stuff
		6. Reverse of entropy, collection of energy
		7. materials into living thing
		8. takes energy from somewhere
		9. open organism of chemicals operating for benefit and reproduction of organism
	3. We should walk around and leave behind life instead of death
5. Footprint is positive
	1. Leave life where you go, instead of asphalt and assigning blame
6. Cradle to cradle
	1. always changing
	2. apply bio and technical nutrients thinking
	3. parsing things into biotechnical cycle
	4. reverse logistics
	5. getting things to where they belong
	6. bio to soil
	7. technical to industry without contamination biosphere
	8. safe water - produce drinking water from textile factory
	9. Renewable energy - powering plants
	10. Social fairness - treat justly and fairly
	11. Diversity - butterfly hatchery building - children can release butterflies extinct every week into city
	12. solve replacement and return of diverse species
7. Scientific protocol / chemicals list robust enough
	1. giving cradle to cradle product certification program in public domain
	2. in institute of SF
	3. Perfected, robust, useful, accurate
	4. depth of database / relationships / information
	5. Much easier for products than cities, buildings, etc
	6. innovation institute in SF
	7. C2C certification org. 

### Ray Anderson

You met Ray in the lessons on the Sustainable Supply Chain.  _Such an impressive guy!_

Ray owned Interface Flooring ([http://www.interface.com/?r=0 (Links to an external site.)](http://www.interface.com/?r=0)), a multinational carpeting company situated in the United States. He revolutionized carpet manufacturing by producing 100% recyclable carpeting (closing the loop!) and, just as significantly, by creating a system whereby clients “rent” carpet tiles. When a tile is damaged or worn, it is replace with a “new” tile and the “old” tile is re-manufactured. The University of British Columbia is a customer of Interface Flooring. Check out the carpeting on the 2nd floor of the Civil Engineering wing of the Civil Engineering Mechanical Engineering (CEME) building! It's Interface Flooring carpet tile.

Ray's accomplishments and contributions to sustainability really are **_astounding_** given the era in which he initiated the transformation of his business (i.e. in the 1990s).

In the 8-minute video below, Ray talks about how his company is evolving into a sustainable manufacturer.

## Video Notes
1. Interface Annual Meeting, Aug 1995
	1. About compliance, reviewing legal requirements, how we are doing, what we are doing to keep skirts clean
	2. What if Interface first company in the world to achieve sustainability
		1. Reaction of marketplace
		2. Example to be set
2. Most proud of buy in of people
3. Weren't expecting what he said
4. How to put green ribbons on what they were doing, putting ads
5. People were stunned on what he had to said, and chellenged them to lead them to mystical sustainability - nobody knew meaning at the time
6. Mental image of a mountain to climb - very difficult
	1. called sustainabiliy
	2. on lowest slopes
	3. we know way to top
7. Speak to people at every opportunity
	1. plant meetings
	2. sales meetings
8. One mind at a time -> 3000 people bought in and internalized to own way of thinking -> home and community
9. Results of committment: 60% to the top of the mountain, 60% of timeline has elapsed from 1994 to 2020
10. Mission zero seemed impossible -> in sight
11. Tech is present, we can see how it can happen
12. Example is still shaping for industrial world


Business case for sustainability
1. has emerged clearly
2. at Interface, costs are down, not up
3. dispels myth and exposes false choice between environment and economy
4. not mutually exclusive
5. products
	1. inspiration of biomimicry
	2. wellspring of innovation
	3. come out of lens of sustainable design
	4. products better than ever
6. Marketplaces:
	1. no amount of advertising that could have created the goodwill this effort has created
	2. authenticity at its best
	3. better way to make bigger and legitimate profit
	4. not at expense of earth or future gen

Love on the factory floor
1. Ray has to retire at some point
2. Rays - consulting arm of company when other companies want to know how to do it
	1. Jim Hartsville, runner of rays
	2. 1st client a big multinational food company
	3. Sent 15 people to Lagrange Georgia (top management)
	4. Head of global engineering, woman, did not understand why they would come to carpet mill in georgia to learn about sustainability
	5. Skeptical
	6. Obstructive for whole morning and challenging  everything
	7. Mid morning break - go thru factory in conference room to ladies' room
	8. Meets James Weisner, fog truck driver, owns factory floor with roll of carpet on fog truck
	9. Stops him and asks him - what do you do here
	10. *I come to work here every day to save the earth*
	11. Stunned by that
	12. Drawing him out - *what do you mean?*
	13. *I don't want to be rude but if I don't get carpet to machine, waste and emissions are going out of control, I have to go*
	14. A changed person, challenging her people *why aren't you doing this / that*
	15. Tells story
	16. Demonstrates alignment from the very top of organization clear to factory floor
	17. Never seen before, 'tis *love*
	18. Love on the factory floor

Unleashing creativity
Reexamining progress made:
1. you unleash creativity of organization when you hold up vision so outrageous it takes breath away
2. Ambitious vision
3. When vision is ambitious, takes us to places you never have dreamed of

A journey of a thousand miles begins with one step. We do this because its the right thing to do. 

# 7.3.3 You?!
CIVL250 is a non-technical survey course that introduces you to major topics in the field of engineering-for-sustainability. You now have the background enabling you to "get in the game" of contributing to the move toward a sustainable future.

Each of us has a part to play and leadership comes in many forms - from highly public leadership, to "leading from behind". Of course, it's up to you to decide what role in society you will play over your career.

If you want to walk the talk, step-up, or even just find out more about engineering-for-sustainability, consider joining the sustainability clubs on-campus including:

-   Engineers for a Sustainable World - UBC: [https://www.facebook.com/eswubc (Links to an external site.)](https://www.facebook.com/eswubc)
-   Engineers Without Borders - UBC: [https://www.facebook.com/EWBUBC (Links to an external site.)](https://www.facebook.com/EWBUBC)

Also Consider taking CIVL 475 (Environmental Stewardship and Urban Systems), a technical elective offered every September.  

What ever path you choose to take - best wishes on your travels!

And, congratulations for completing all the CIVL 250 lessons.

Note that the final exam for the course is a face-2-face exam held during the regular Dec exam period.


